---
title: Director of Propulsion Engineering - StageZero
description: How I became the foremost propulsion authority on a liquid rocket engine design team
date: 2025-05-19 18:50 -0400
category: [Summer25, StageZero]
tags: [propulsion, rockets]
---

## An idea...
Being interested in propulsion, rockets have always been 50% of the equation. Although, I haven't been particularly interested in them, my friends and I jokingly suggested that we should design an engine and attempt to start a team. That went on for some months before things started being less of a joke and more of a serious conversation. 

We had our first semi-official meeting late in the Fall '24 semester, where things were mostly just who was interested in leading what system, and high-level choices. It wasn't until our first official, second overall, meeting that we landed on the name StageZero. The idea was that this was the first step toward a full rocket system, and so we are in 'Stage Zero' of development. Cheesy? Sure, but it got the job done.

And so we had settled on a schedule. One meeting during the Spring semester to arrange things before everyone left for the summer (it is worth noting that all team members are friends and so we would talk about this often, just not as a formal meeting).

## First Steps
Summer rolled around and so did our first meeting. It was great getting to see everyone settled in to internships, research positions, and jobs. And to make things better, we were all excited to get started, unaware of the hardships this project would put us through.

A significant amount of time was spent doing research. Learning about what we don't know and what we should know. My role in this was the propulsion lead. This meant I was responsible for the combustion chamber, nozzle, and injector. I spent a fair bit of time combing through online resources other collegiate design teams had put out about their rockets, which was super helpful. A number of YouTube tutorials helped me develop our first script which sized the engine parameters. From there, I found about Rocket Propulsion Analysis (RPA), which took all the parameters we had just found, and turned it into an optimized engine.

So far, things were pretty good. Some challenges here and there but nothing that couldn't be solved by just sitting down and working through it together. Well, this is where my, and the wider team's, luck ran out.

## Big Challenges
The injector is probably the second most important part of the rocket behind the nozzle. A poor nozzle means you make no thrust (or leave some on the 'table') or blow up your engine. A bad injector, will make both of those things ten times worse. And the best part is, most of this information is locked behind trade secrets or governmental restrictions. I had spent almost a month going between several different types of injectors, none of which worked due to our small engine design. I emailed professors, reached out to other teams and continued to search through the NASA database to no avail.

This challenge has hung us up so much that things have effectively halted. I spent some time working with the electronic systems lead [Alex Barnes](https://www.linkedin.com/in/alexanderbarnesvtech/) teaching him python to develop the test stand's user interface. I've made some preliminary designs and ran them through the CFD solver Ansys Fluent, but nothing good has come of it. Turns out, simulating rocket combustion is really really hard, and often is left to people with more letters infront of their name than I have. 

## Where we stand today
Things were put on pause following the injector issues. We have pivoted toward reaching out to the university to gauge interest and see if they'll even allow it. While there has been interest from other friends, every time this idea was floated to Virginia Tech, they quickly shot it down as too dangerous. 

We started knowing that this would be hard. From finding an advisor, development area, funding, and then actually designing the engine, everything has been against us. We hope that in the coming months, the university will allow us to continue StageZero's development with plans of fully integrating the engine to an officially recognized design team some day.

Unfortunately, past that part my involvement will cease. Like I mentioned, I have never been particularly interested in rocket engines. Something about them just doesn't give me that child-like sense of happiness that an engine does. I don't have enough time between classes, senior design, MachWorks, and now two research positions I am continuing from this susmmer. My interest in StageZero, albeit high, is not high enough to sacrifice from some other place. 

So stay tuned for where this team goes. There is a good chance that once again the school tells us to stop like they have those before us, but we are hoping that they will at least let us pleade our case. And at least I can say I started a design team.